.TH SEARCH-IN-SUBS 1 2025-08-07 "SEARCH-IN-SUBS 0.3.6"
.
.SH NAME
.
search-in-subs \- search for words in subtitle files
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY search-in-subs
[<options>] -t <search_term> ... [<file|dir> ...]
.YS
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
\fBsearch-in-subs\fR allows the user to search for text in SRT subtitle files.
.P
At least one search term must be specified to run a search (see \%\fB-t,\ --search-term\fR). If no \%<file|dir> argument is given, a glob pattern set with the \%\fBconf_default_glob\fR option is used to match subtitle files. If a \%<file|dir> argument is a directory, files matching the default glob pattern in that directory are added to the search.
.P
The default value of \%\fBconf_default_glob\fR is \%'*.srt', which matches all files with the '.srt' extension in the current working directory. That value can be changed to any other glob pattern in the configuration file (see CONFIGURATION and FILES below).
.P
Shell options \%'nullglob', \%'extglob' and \%'globstar' are enabled internally in \%\fBsearch-in-subs\fR, so shell globbing can be used to its full capacity when setting \%\fBconf_default_glob\fR. For example, to match all \%'.srt' files in the current working directory recursively, including all of its subdirectories, one could set \%\fBconf_default_glob\fR to \%'**/*.srt'.
.P
\%\fBsearch-in-subs\fR can also gather statistics on searches that it runs. Try running a search with the \%\fB-s,\ --stats\fR option set. For more information, see STATISTICS below.
.
.SS mpv EDL generation
.P
\%\fBsearch-in-subs\fR can generate EDL files for \%\fBmpv\fR player, and play the search results using it. To use this functionality, \%\fBmpv\fR, \%\fBffmpeg\fR and \%\fBlua\fR\ (v5.4) must be installed and available on system's PATH.
.P
In order to generate the EDL files, a video or audio file must exist in the same directory as the subtitle file(s) on which the search is performed. The video or audio file must have the same name as the subtitle file, minus the \%'.srt' extension, and potentially additional extensions containing language codes or other information, e.g. \%'.en.srt'. Any number of additional extensions is allowed. If both video and audio files are found, video files take precedence. If multiple video or audio files are found, the first one will be chosen for use in the generated EDL files.
.P
See \%\fB--edl-*\fR options below for more information.
.P
More information on mpv EDL format can be found at \%<https://github.com/\:mpv-player/\:mpv/\:blob/\:master/\:DOCS/\:edl-mpv.rst>.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
.SS Passing arguments to options
.P
Enhanced \%\fBgetopt\fR syntax applies when passing options. There is one important point to highlight when it comes to passing options with required vs optional arguments.
.P
In case of a short option, if an option takes a \fIrequired\fR argument, the argument may be written as a separate parameter, \fIor\fR directly after the option character. If an option takes an \fIoptional\fR argument, however, the argument \fImust\fR be written directly after the option character.
.P
In case of a long option, if an option takes a \fIrequired\fR argument, the argument may be written as a separate parameter, \fIor\fR directly after the option name, separated by an equals sign \%('='). If an option takes an \fIoptional\fR argument, however, the argument \fImust\fR be written directly after the option name, separated by an equals sign \%('=').
.
.TS
tab(|);
l l l .
|Short option|Long option
Required argument|\fB-o\fR <value>|\fB--option\fR <value>
|\fB-o\fR<value>|\fB--option\fR=<value>
Optional argument|\fB-o\fR[<value>]|\fB--option\fR[=<value>]
.TE
.
.P
Options that take optional arguments can be recognized in the options list below by their \%<value> and the preceding equals sign being enclosed in square brackets:
.P
.EX
\fB-o, --option\fR[=<value>]
.EE
.
.SS General
.
.TP
.B \%-t,\ --search-term\fR=<search_term>
Text to search for. Can be a fixed string or a regular expression depending on the \%\fB-r,\ --regex\fR\ / \%\fB-R,\ --no-regex\fR options.
.
.sp
At least one search term must be given to perform a search. Setting this option multiple times sets multiple search terms.
.
.TP
.B \%-v,\ --verbose
Print the filename even if there were no matches found in that file.
.
.TP
.B \%-V,\ --no-verbose
Print filenames only for files that had matches. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-i,\ --inverse
Only print the names of the files where no matches were found.
.
.TP
.B \%-I,\ --no-inverse
Do not supress printing of matches and names of the files where matches were found. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-j,\ --filenames-only
Suppress printing of matched subtitles. Only print the name of the file where matches were found.
.
.TP
.B \%-J,\ --no-filenames-only
Do not supress printing of matched subtitles. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-q,\ --quiet
Do not print any matches or filenames. Useful, for example, if one only wishes to see the statistics or the exit status.
.
.TP
.B \%-Q,\ --no-quiet
Do not suppress printing of matches or filenames. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-r,\ --regex
Use regular expressions instead of fixed strings in \%<search_term>s.
.sp
The regular expressions used are POSIX Extended Regular Expressions as implemented in GNU sed. More information on can be found at \%<https://www.gnu.org/\:software/\:sed/\:manual/\:sed.html#sed-regular-expressions>.
.
.TP
.B \%-R,\ --no-regex
Use fixed strings instead of regular expressions in \%<search_term>s. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-c,\ --match-case
Make the search case-sensitive.
.
.TP
.B \%-C,\ --no-match-case
Make the search case-insensitive. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-e,\ --exact-whitespace
Match whitespace characters exactly as specified in the \%<search_term>.
.
.TP
.B \%-E,\ --no-exact-whitespace
Treat all whitespace characters the same during search \- ignoring the type of whitespace character, and how many of them appear in a sequence. This is the default.
.sp
Whitespace characters are: space, newline, carriage return, horizontal tab, vertical tab and form feed (POSIX Extended Regular Expressions \%'[:space:]' character class).
.
.SS Statistics
.
.TP
.B \%-s,\ --stats
Show match statistics after search.
.sp
See STATISTICS below for more information.
.
.TP
.B \%-S,\ --no-stats
Do not show match statistics after search. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-h,\ --stats-headers
Show headers in the statistics table. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-H,\ --stats-no-headers
Do not show headers in the statistics table.
.
.TP
.B \%-m,\ --stats-headers-compact
Compactify headers in the statistics table.
.
.TP
.B \%-M,\ --stats-headers-no-compact
Do not compactify headers in the statistics table. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-n,\ --stats-headers-file-numbers
Show file numbers in the headers of the statistics table. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-N,\ --stats-headers-no-file-numbers
Do not show file numbers in the headers of the statistics table.
.
.TP
.B \%-w,\ --stats-wrap-filenames
Wrap filenames in the statistics table. This is the default.
.sp
The table always fits the width of the terminal screen, but filenames may be printed on multiple lines.
.
.TP
.B \%-W,\ --stats-no-wrap-filenames
Do not wrap filenames in the statistics table.
.sp
Files are always printed one per row, regardless of whether the table fits the width of the terminal screen.
.
.SS mpv EDL generation
.
.TP
.B \%-p,\ --edl-play
Play search results in \%\fBmpv\fR.
.sp
Unless \%\fB-f,\ --edl-save-files-relative\fR or \%\fB-F,\ --edl-save-files-absolute\fR is used together with this option, temporary EDL files are generated and saved in the cache directory (see FILES for more information). The \%\fB-k,\ --edl-keep-temporary\fR and \%\fB-K,\ --edl-no-keep-temporary\fR options control whether or the temporary EDL files are deleted or kept after \%\fBmpv\fR player closes.
.sp
If \%\fB-f,\ --edl-save-files-relative\fR or \%\fB-F,\ --edl-save-files-absolute\fR is used together with \%\fB-p,\ --edl-play\fR, then temporary files are not generated and the saved EDL files are played.
.
.TP
.B \%-P,\ --edl-no-play
Do not play search results in \%\fBmpv\fR. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-k,\ --edl-play-keep-temporary
Keep temporary EDL files that are created to play search results in \%\fBmpv\fR.
.
.TP
.B \%-K,\ --edl-play-no-keep-temporary
Do not keep temporary EDL files that are created to play search results in \%\fBmpv\fR. This is the default.
.sp
The temporary files are deleted right after \%\fBmpv\fR player closes.
.
.TP
.B \%-b,\ --edl-play-before\fR=<value>
Add a specified amount of time before each segment when generating EDL files. \%<value> is in seconds. Precise values with a decimal separator are allowed. The default \%<value> is 0.
.
.TP
.B \%-a,\ --edl-play-after\fR=<value>
Add a specified amount of time after each segment when generating EDL files. \%<value> is in seconds. Precise values with a decimal separator are allowed. The default \%<value> is 0.
.
.TP
.B \%-f,\ --edl-save\fR[={<path>[/]|<path>/<name>.edl|<name>.edl}]
Save EDL files to a specified location instead of generating temporary ones.
.sp
If \%<path> is not given, the EDL files are saved to the current working directory. If \%<name> is not given, the name set by \%\fBconf_edl_default_name\fR will be used.
.sp
A '.edl' extension after \%<name> is required because it serves to distinguish a directory called \%"<name>" from a name of an EDL file. To save to a directory whose name ends in \%'.edl' (without specifying \%"<name>.edl"), add a trailing forward slash \%('/') after \%<path>.
.
.TP
.B \%-F,\ --edl-no-save
Do not save EDL files, but generate temporary files instead. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%--edl-save-paths\fR=<value>
What kind of paths to use in saved EDL files to refer to source files.
.
.RS
.TP
relative
Use relative paths. This is the default.
.TP
absolute
Use absolute paths.
.RE
.
.TP
.B \%-d,\ --edl-save-mkdir
Create the EDL save directory (the \%<path> value of \%\fB--edl-save-files-*\fR options) if it does not exist.
.
.TP
.B \%-D,\ --edl-save-no-mkdir
Do not create the EDL save directory (the \%<path> value of \%\fB--edl-save-files-*\fR options) if it does not exist. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-y,\ --edl-save-overwrite
Allow overwriting existing files when saving EDL files.
.
.TP
.B \%-Y,\ --edl-save-no-overwrite
Do not allow overwriting existing files when saving EDL files. This is the default.
.
.TP
.B \%-o,\ --edl-ignore-missing
Omit segments with missing videos when generating EDL files. This is the default.
.sp
If set, a warning message is shown listing subtitle files for which no corresponding video file could be identified, but EDL files are still generated if at least one relevant video file was able to be found.
.
.TP
.B \%-O,\ --edl-no-ignore-missing
Do not omit segments with missing videos when generating EDL files.
.sp
If set, an error message is shown listing subtitle files for which no corresponding video file could be identified, In this case, no EDL files are generated, and \fBsearch-in-subs\fR exits with exit status 3.
.
.TP
.B \%-u,\ --edl-structure\fR=<value>
Determines the structure of the set of generated EDL files. \%<value> can be \%'flat', \%'subdir', \%'subdir_hidden', \%'subdir_except_chapters' or \%'subdir_hidden_except_chapters'. The default \%<value> is \%'flat'.
.
.TP
.B \%--mpv-opts\fR=[:[:]]<opts>
Options to \%\fBmpv\fR player.
.sp
\%<opts> is an option string that follows \%\fBxargs\fR quoting. It can be preceded by a single colon, double colon, or nothing.
.sp
The leading colons control whether \%<opts> get appended to previously set options, or replace them.
.sp
The phrase 'previously set options' refers to either the default value of \%<opts> set by \fBsearch-in-subs\fR itself \%(''), or a value set in the configuration file.
.sp
When a single colon \%(':') is used, \%<opts> replace the previously set options.
.sp
When a double colon \%('::') is used, \%<opts> are appended to the previously set options.
.sp
When the leading colons are omitted, whether \%<opts> replace the previously set options, or are appended to them is determined by an *additonal* value that is yet again set either by \fBsearch-in-subs\fR itself (append), or in the configuration file.
.sp
The name of the variable that controls this has the following format: \%\fBoptdata__<opt_name>__<optdata_name>\fR where \%<opt_name> is the name of the option, and \%<optdata_name> is the name of the piece of option data that the variable holds. In this case \%<optdata_name> is \%'append'. So if the option's variable is called \%\fBopt_mpv_opts\fR, then the variable that controls what happens when the leading colons are omitted is called \%\fBoptdata__mpv_opts__append\fR.
.
.SS Other
.
.TP
.B \%--color\fR[={always|auto|never}]\fR
Colorize the output. The default value is 'auto'.
.
.RS
.TP 10
always
Always colorize.
.TP
[auto]
Colorize if stdout is connected to a terminal.
.TP
never
Never colorize.
.RE
.
.TP
.B \%--no-color\fR
Disable colorization of the output. Equivalent to \fB\%-c,\ --color\fR set to 'never'.
.
.TP
.B \%--help
Open the man page.
.
.TP
.B \%--version
Print version information.
.
.TP
.B \%--config\fR[={auto|edit|generate|remove|none}]
Perform an action on the configuration file. See also CONFIGURATION and FILES below.
.
.RS
.TP 9
\%[auto]
Generate a configuration file if it does not exist. If it does, open it in a text editor.
.TP
\%edit
Open an existing configuration file in a text editor.
.TP
\%generate
Generate a new configuration file.
.TP
\%remove
Delete an existing configuration file. If the configuration directory doesn't have any other files, it is also deleted.
.TP
\%none
Do not use the configuration file. Use the program in its default configuration.
.RE
.
.TP
.B \%--no-config
Do not use the configuration file. Use the program in its default configuration. Equivalent to \fB\%--config\fR set to 'none'.
.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.P
This is how command line options and configuration variables correspond to each other. The command line option on the left sets the variable(s) on the right internally.
.P
Special symbols in the right column:
.
.TP
-
This option is non-configurable.
.TP
"
This option sets the same variable(s) as the one above.
.
.P
.TS
nokeep;
lb lb .
-t, --search-term\fR=<value>	opt_search_term
-v, --verbose	opt_verbose
-V, --no-verbose	\fR"
-i, --inverse	opt_inverse
-I, --no-inverse	\fR"
-j, --filenames-only	opt_filenames_only
-J, --no-filenames-only	\fR"
-q, --quiet	opt_quiet
-Q, --no-quiet	\fR"
-r, --regex	opt_regex
-R, --no-regex	\fR"
-c, --match-case	opt_match_case
-C, --no-match-case	\fR"
-e, --exact-whitespace	opt_exact_whitespace
-E, --no-exact-whitespace	\fR"
-s, --stats	opt_stats
-S, --no-stats	\fR"
-h, --stats-headers	opt_stats_headers
-H, --stats-no-headers	\fR"
-m, --stats-headers-compact	opt_stats_headers_compact
-M, --stats-headers-no-compact	\fR"
-n, --stats-headers-file-numbers	opt_stats_headers_file_numbers
-N, --stats-headers-no-file-numbers	\fR"
-w, --stats-wrap-filenames	opt_stats_wrap_filenames
-W, --stats-no-wrap-filenames	\fR"
-p, --edl-play	opt_edl_play
-P, --edl-no-play	\fR"
-k, --edl-play-keep-temporary	opt_edl_play_keep_temporary
-K, --edl-play-no-keep-temporary	\fR"
-b, --edl-play-before\fR=<value>	opt_edl_play_before
-a, --edl-play-after\fR=<value>	opt_edl_play_after
-f, --edl-save\fR[=<value>]	opt_edl_save
	optdata__edl_save__file
-F, --edl-no-save	\fR"
--edl-save-paths\fR=<value>	opt_edl_save_paths
-d, --edl-save-mkdir	opt_edl_save_mkdir
-D, --edl-save-no-mkdir	\fR"
-y, --edl-save-overwrite	opt_edl_save_overwrite
-Y, --edl-save-no-overwrite	\fR"
-o, --edl-ignore-missing	opt_edl_ignore_missing
-O, --edl-no-ignore-missing	\fR"
-u, --edl-structure\fR=<value>	opt_edl_structure
--mpv-opts\fR=<value>	opt_mpv_opts
	optdata__mpv_opts__append
--color\fR[=<value>]	opt_color
--no-color\fR	\fR"
--help	\fR-
--version	\fR-
--config\fR[=<value>]	\fR-
.TE
.
.SS Configuration file-only parameters
.
.TP
.B \%conf_default_glob
A shell glob pattern to use when no \%<file|dir> arguments are specified, or when a \%<file|dir> argument is a directory. The default is \%'*.srt'.
.sp
Shell options \%'nullglob', \%'extglob' and \%'globstar' are enabled internally in \%\fBsearch-in-subs\fR, thus the default glob pattern is sensitive to those options.  
.
.TP
.B \%conf_edl_default_name
The default name for a generated EDL file. The default value is \%'search_results'.
.
.TP
.B \%conf_chapter_title
A generated EDL's chapter title. The value is a string with placeholders. See also PLACEHOLDER FORMAT.
.sp
If set to an empty string (''), the result is equivalent to using the value of '%{text_abbr}', but with a slight performance increase. The default value is ''.
.sp
The following placeholders are supported:
.
.RS
.TP
%{file_base}
Base name of the video file.
.TP
%{file_edl}
Path to the video file as it appears in the generated EDL.
.TP
%{file_rel}
Path to the video file relative to the current working directory.
.TP
%{file_abs}
Absolute path to the video file.
.TP
%{n}
Subtitle number as it appears in the SRT file.
.TP
%{timecodes_raw}
Timecodes as they appear in the SRT file.
.TP
%{timecode_start}
Opening timecode in the \fBmpv\fR format.
.TP
%{timecode_start_raw}
Opening timecode as it appears in the SRT file.
.TP
%{timecode_end}
Closing timecode in the \fBmpv\fR format.
.TP
%{timecode_end_raw}
Closing timecode as it appears in the SRT file.
.TP
%{text_tall}
Subtitle text as it appears in the SRT file. Formatting tags such as \%<i></i> are removed.
.TP
%{text_long}
Like %{text_tall}, but with newlines replaced with spaces.
.TP
%{text_abbr}
Like %{text_tall}, but only showing the first line of the subtitle.
.RE
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.
.TP
0
Success. No errors have occurred, and at least one match was found.
.TP
1
A general error has occurred.
.TP
2
No matches were found.
.TP
3
EDL generation failed. Can only occur if \%\fB-O,\ --edl-no-ignore-missing\fR is set.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.P
The values of \%\fBVISUAL\fR and \%\fBEDITOR\fR environment variables determine the text editor when opening configuration files with \%\fB--config\fR.
.P
\%\fBVISUAL\fR is evaluated first. If that is not set, then \%\fBEDITOR\fR is evaluated. If neither is set, \%\fBnano\fR is used as the text editor.
.
.SH FILES
.P
A configuration file can be used to change the default behavior of \%\fBsearch-in-subs\fR.
.P
The configuration file's location is \%"$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/\:search-in-subs/\:config.bash". If \%"XDG_CONFIG_HOME" is not set, it defaults to \%"$HOME/\:.config".
.P
Temporary EDL files that are generated when using the \%\fB-p,\ --edl-play\fR option are stored in a cache directory.
.P
The cache directory's location is \%"$XDG_CACHE_HOME/\:search-in-subs". If \%"XDG_CACHE_HOME" is not set, it defaults to \%"$HOME/\:.cache".
.
.SH STATISTICS
.P
If the \%\fB-s,\ --stats\fR option is enabled, \%\fBsearch-in-subs\fR gathers statistics on the search that it performs and displays those statistics in a table at the end of the output.
.P
The 'Matched', 'Total', 'Unmatched' and 'Matched\ %' columns of that table contain the following data: 
.P
In the file rows: 
.
.TS
tab(|);
l l .
Matched|Number of subtitles in the file that had matches.
Total|Total number of subtitles in the file.
Unmatched|Number of subtitles in the file that did not have matches.
Matched %|Percentage of subtitles in the file that had matches.
.TE
.P
In the 'Average' row: 
.
.TS
tab(|);
l l .
Matched|Average number of subtitles per file that had matches.
Total|Average number of subtitles per file.
Unmatched|Average number of subtitles per file that did not have matches.
Matched %|Average percentage of subtitles per file that had matches.
.TE
.P
In the 'Total' row: 
.
.TS
tab(|);
l l .
Matched|Total number of subtitles in all files that had matches.
Total|Total number of subtitles in all files.
Unmatched|Total number of subtitles in all files that did not have matches.
Matched %|Total percentage of subtitles in all files that had matches.
.TE
.P
In the 'File' column of the 'Total' row, information is presented in the following format:
.P
<Matched> / <Total> (<Unmatched>) <Matched\ %>
.P
Where the placeholder values represent the following:
.
.TS
tab(|);
l l .
<Matched>|Total number of files that had matches.
<Total>|Total number of files.
<Unmatched>|Total number of files that did not have matches.
<Matched %>|Percentage of files that had matches.
.TE
.
.SH PLACEHOLDER FORMAT
.
.TP
(1)
\%%<name>
.sp
or
.TP
.TP
(2)
\%%{<name>:-<fallback>:+<override>}
.sp
\%:-<fallback> and \%:+<override> are optional and may go in any order.
.
.P
\%<name> is a placeholder name.
.P
\%<fallback> and \%<override> are also strings with placeholders just like the entire string.
.P
\%<fallback> is substituted if the replacement value is unavailable.
.P
\%<override> is substituted instead of the replacement value allowing to, for instance, insert extra characters next to it.
.P
In strings with placeholders, \%'\\', \%'%', \%'{', \%':', and \%'}' are special characters. They can be escaped with backslashes \%('\\') to represent their literal values.
.RE
.
.SH AUTHOR
.P
Alex Rogers \%<https://github.com/\:linguisticmind>
.
.SH HOMEPAGE
.P
\%<https://github.com/\:linguisticmind/\:search-in-subs>
.
.SH COPYRIGHT
.P
Copyright © 2025 Alex Rogers. License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later \%<https://gnu.org/\:licenses/\:gpl.html>.
.P
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it. There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

\" vim: set syntax=groff list listchars=tab\:␉· tabstop=40 :
